Walmart And Google Partner For Sales To Fight Amazon

Walmart has joined forces with Google in a partnership that will enable customers to voice order purchases. That is a major step for Walmart in their effort to regain leadership in the very competitive race for e-commerce dominance with Amazon.

Starting in late September 2017, Walmart will add its full assortment on Google’s Express and allow customers to access the site through voice ordering on Google’s virtual assistant, Google Home.  Google Home is a device very much like Amazon’s Alexa (a.k.a. Amazon Echo).

Using Google Home, as well as other smart devices will enable customers to quickly fulfill their needs in food and general merchandise.   While other retailers, among them Target, Kohl’s, Costco, Walgreens and Ulta have already set up a similar relationship with Google Express, the hundreds of thousands of products that Walmart will offer on Google Express is a much greater and deeper partnership than what these other retailers have in place.  That will totally redefine competitive landscape.


Mark Lore, president and CEO of Walmart U.S. e-commerce, indicated that “It makes sense to team with Google. They have made significant investments in natural language processing and artificial intelligence to deliver a powerful voice shopping experience.” He added, “We know this means being compared side-by-side with other retailers, and we think that is the way it should be. An open and transparent shopping universe is good for customers. It will enable us to deliver highly personalized shopping recommendations based on customers’ previous purchases, including those made in Walmart stores and on Walmart.com.”

Lore indicated that Walmart will go further and offer increased voice shopping capabilities in 2018. This is exciting news since it is what the customer wants – especially when they run low on food and can order when they stand near their refrigerator and see what they need.

YOU MAY ALSO LIKE
Grads of Life BRANDVOICE
How To Inspire Students To Explore Career Options
Grads of Life BRANDVOICE
Tech Internships Open Doors For San Diego Youth
UNICEF USA BRANDVOICE
In Photos: The Universal Power Of A Mother's Love
Such an aggressive posture highlights the increasing importance of voice shopping. It is, according to some experts, a fast-growing development of online sales and will continue to evolve in the next few years. Certainly, the commands that can be given to devices like Alexa and Echo and the soon-to-be unveiled Apple speaker are another step in technology sophistication that will heighten the competitive battle between Walmart and Amazon.

The recently completed acquisition by Amazon of Whole Food Markets just serves to underscore how important a more aggressive grocery delivery service will be for Walmart. To compete, it has already been announced that Uber will make deliveries for Walmart in certain test markets. Walmart also offers discounts for on-line orders that are picked up in stores, and management stresses its new two-day free deliveries as another competitive initiative to drive business. The battle lines have been drawn, one could say redrawn, as a giant retailer the likes of Walmart is now doing battle with on-line competition like Amazon, Ali Baba and many others.

The average Walmart shopper leads a busy life. Maybe shopping has just become a little easier. The technology has become just a little more intriguing. And maybe it is a little more fun.
