Piscataway man charged in connection with Snapchat video showing gun

PISCATAWAY - A township man has been charged with possession of an assault weapon and a large capacity ammunition magazine following an investigation into a Snapchat video.

Darryl Maddox, 32, was arrested and charged Wednesday with second-degree possession of an assault firearm, fourth-degree possession of a large capacity ammunition magazine and fourth-degree destruction of evidence, according to a news release from Middlesex County Prosecutor Andrew C. Carey and Piscataway Police  Chief Michael McLaughlin.

The investigation began when the Piscataway Police Department was notified at about 3:10 p.m. Tuesday that a Snapchat video was posted of a man with an assault type weapon which was re-posted by others through social media.

Piscataway police and other law enforcement agencies are investigating an alleged Snapchat multimedia video depicting a weapon that is circulating on social mediaBuy Photo
Piscataway police and other law enforcement agencies are investigating an alleged Snapchat multimedia video depicting a weapon that is circulating on social media (Photo: Susan Loyer/Staff Photo)

The investigation determined that Maddox was in possession of an assault firearm and a large capacity ammunition magazine, which he discarded, the release said.

On Tuesday night, a post on the Piscataway Police Department's Facebook page indicated that they "are actively and aggressively investigating the origin of this message."

"This investigation is still very active and fluid," the Facebook post said. "Although the social media post did not specify an exact location, or even a school, we are taking this very seriously. We continue to work with the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office and our other law enforcement partners to determine the exact origins of this Snapchat post."


More: See if your school made the list of the top high schools in New Jersey

In their post on Tuesday, police said there would be "a heavy and very visible police presence" at Piscataway Schools on Wednesday to safeguard all students.

In a statement on Wednesday morning, Superintendent of Schools Teresa M. Rafferty said that on Tuesday evening, "a disturbing video" was posted on Snapchat and reported to the Piscataway Police.


"The Piscataway Police, working with the Middlesex County Prosecutor's Office, immediately began an investigation," Rafferty said. "While the video did not indicate a direct threat to Piscataway Schools, the police also alerted Piscataway School Administration, and we have worked with them throughout the night to ensure the safety and security of our students this morning (Wednesday)."

Rafferty said "your child's safety in school is our greatest priority, and there will be an increased police presence at all Piscataway Schools this morning, Wednesday, May 1."

In a community notification on Wednesday, Rutgers Police Department also reported that there would be an increased police presence on the Busch and Livingston campuses of Rutgers University on Wednesday.

READ: Pallone, Piscataway officials stress need to combat climate change in NJ

"We take every threat, real or perceived, seriously," Mayor Brian C. Wahler said on Wednesday.  "Our police department is investigating it, we have additional police presence at all of the schools today, and our police department in conjunction with the Middlesex County Prosecutor's office is working closely with the school district on this matter."

The investigation is continuing.

Anyone with information is asked to call Detective Daniel Nee of the Piscataway Police Department at 732-562-2362, or Detective Christopher Pennisi of the Middlesex County Prosecutor’s Office at 732-745-3330.
