
GOOGLE'S FINALLY OFFERING RIDES IN ITS SELF-DRIVING MINIVANS

AFTER SPENDING NEARLY a decade quetly working on self-driving cars, Google finally wants to take people for a ride. Its autonomous spin-off, Waymo plans to add 500 Chrysler Pacifica minivans to the 100 already roaming the roads of Phoenix, and inviteds locals to sign up for free rides to school, work, soccer practice, or anywhere else they need to go.

Waymo almost certainly possesses the most sophisticated autonomous technology in this increasingly crowded field. After three million miles on the road, its cars can drive thousands of miles without human intervention. But delivering the technology to consumers requires more than developing the right algorithms and hardware.

With its Phoenix launch, Waymo starts solving the other side of the equation: the human in the car. Before Waymo can deliver technology people use, it must understand what people need. When do they leave for work? Do they drop the kids at school first? Do they prefer constant updates on what the car is doing, would they rather be left alone, or do they want something in between? That’s the sort of information Waymo’s competitors already collect.

"While Waymo has a market lead with respect to real world testing of autonomous vehicles on the roads, what they don’t have is the interaction with human behavior that Uber and Lyft do,” says Susan Shaheen, who studies innovation and adoption of new technologies at UC Berkeley's Transportation Sustainability Research Center.

Uber's tech may not be as mature as Waymo's—during WIRED's test ride in September, an engineer took control every few minutes—but the company knows a lot about what riders want. Beyond having 55 million monthly active riders in nearly 600 cities worldwide, Uber provides robo-car rides in Phoenix and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (California law prohibits Uber's autonomous Volvos in San Francisco from picking up passengers.)

TRICKSY HUMANS

ALEX DAVIES
The Very Human Problem Blocking the Path to Self-Driving Cars


JACK STEWART
Self-Driving Cars Won’t Just Watch the World—They’ll Watch You


ALEX DAVIES
Nissan’s Path to Self-Driving Cars? Humans in Call Centers

By launching in Arizona, which welcomes autonomous vehicles and doesn't require anyone to report in their technology or progress, Waymo takes a big step toward cracking the human problem. (It pokes Uber, a company with which it is embroiled in a legal battle over autonomous tech.)

If you live in the Phoenix metro area and want to experience the future, you can apply to join the Early Rider program online by answering a few questions about your travel habits. No word yet on how Waymo will select participants, or how many people it plans to enroll, but the company says it will encourage people to ride as often as possible. Anyone making the cut will summon rides in one of Waymo's sensor-clad Lexus SUVs or Chrysler minivans. Don't worry, a safety driver will keep an eye on everything and step in if necessary. After nearly a decade of work, the company wants to make a great first impression.
