5 Pillars Of Alphabet's Impenetrable Moat
Summary
Though many investors put great faith in Alphabet's upside potential from forward-looking technologies, it is the staples that have kept the company growing stronger by the year.

What's more, advertising revenue growth is merely the end result of having five key pillars that fortify Alphabet's moat.

Lets see what these pillars are and how they indirectly contributed to a doubling of stock price over the last three years.

More importantly, let's see why this is as good a time as any to be investing in this juggernaut of a company.

Alphabet (GOOG) (GOOGL), Google's parent company, has several qualities that make it a solid investment, but none of those are actually new developments. It's not the cloud business, which is yet to reach puberty, it's not the smartphone unit, which is barely scratching the surface with a 0.11% market share as of October 2017, and it's not even the more respectable 24% share of the smart speaker segment that the company enjoys.

What makes Google a solid investment even today is its moat in the advertising space. Surprisingly, this moat is formed by products that the company makes no direct income from. However, these products are conduits for any technology company's most valuable asset - users.

Let's see how these important pillars funnel billions of dollars into Alphabet's coffers, allowing it to double its stock price over the past three years alone and make it the attractive investment that it represents even today.

Google's In-house Apps
Google Maps and Gmail. Enough said. Though the list of in-house apps created by Google easily runs more than a couple of pages, these are the two standout applications.



Source: EmailClientMarketshare

Gmail holds a one-fourth share of the email client market, bested only by Apple (NASDAQ:AAPL), which has the advantage of device users. The data is from a study size of 1.5 billion email opens, so it basically represents the bulk of Internet users across the globe.
